My experience in Latin 101 was very enjoyable in addition to immensely useful. One of the aspects of the class I appreciated the most the way it made me consider sentence structure. Prior to Latin, I had a loose understanding of sentence structure and grammar in general. Although it still needs an adequate amount of attention, while writing my Mathematics and Economics research papers I saw what I had learned in the Latin classroom extending far beyond my study of the language. Throughout the semester, I’ve become increasingly dissatisfied with lengthy English sentences. This is likely because Latin conveys the same messages in more concise and effective sentences. During the construction of my essays, I noticed, more than ever, how bland my word choice was. Learning all the Latin stems, and which English words descended from them, made me want to be more conscious of the words I use to convey my thoughts. 
	To tie this sentiment into some of the discussions we had in class and in CBL, I can see, more clearly now, how Latin can perpetuate academic inequalities. Considering Latin has made a notable change in my academic career in just three months, I can only imagine what it would be like to study it for years. One reason the study of Latin is often elitist now is because fewer people are studying it. Prior to studying Latin at Holy Cross, Latin was something I thought of as only being taught at private institutions. Even at a collegiate level, most people I know studying Latin attend private universities. Since less people are studying it, less people are able to teach it, and from basic supply and demand, those that are demanding it, are usually the ones that had the opportunity to study it. This further isolates people on account of their income or where they can afford to receive an education. 
	Understanding this helped convey the importance of our work in CBL. Although we didn’t have the opportunity to go into Worcester classrooms, it still drew our attention to why we needed to place substantial effort into creating lesson plans. Even if we never have the chance to do it ourselves because of Covid, being able to hand the lesson plans off to future Holy Cross Latin students can help get the ball rolling on shrinking the academic inequality gap. 
The other really interesting topic of conversation I really enjoyed was the use of the subjective. The Phuc Tran talk opened my eyes to the notion that the way we convey our words, dictates our attitude. I began thinking about all the times I felt the most pain and hurt. Previously, I thought the subjunctive was a tool to be able to verbalize the pain and absence I felt in my heart, but being able to do so, also led me to harp on things out of my control, and lose sight of gratitude. While the subjunctive is powerful, spending too much time reflecting on what could’ve been or should’ve been, can be damaging for mental health. In the age of social media, we have a lot to compare our experience to. Being able to verbalize our thoughts on feeling inadequate or as if life could’ve been different had we taken another path can be rather damaging. 
Overall, this semester has changed the way I think about pretty much everything pertaining to academia, language, and culture but that’s how I know this class is doing its job. Language is supposed to be a way for us to understand ourselves, one another, and the world around us. Without language, so much of the fruit and beauty of life would go unnoticed. I’m really looking forward to studying latin next semester, and I am grateful I attend an institution where I have the opportunity to study this language. 
